two months ago my kids and I huddled
around a cell phone watching a
livestream of the game Awards one of the
video game industry's biggest nights
they announced the nominees for the game
for impact an award that's given to a
thought-provoking video game with a
profound pro-social message or meaning
they open the envelope and they read the
title of our videogame an award for
impact it was almost funny actually
because I always thought that winning an
award like that would have this huge
impact on my life but I found that the
opposite is true the big nights the
accomplishments they fade but the
hardest nights of my life have stuck
with me impacting Who I am and what I do
in 2010 my third son Joel was diagnosed
with a rare and aggressive brain tumor
and before that year was finished
doctors Sat my husband and I down and
let us know that his tumor had returned
despite the most aggressive chemotherapy
and radiation that they could offer him
on that terrible night after learning
that Joel had perhaps four months to
live I cuddled up with my two older sons
in bed they were five and three at the
time and I never really knew how much
they understood so I started telling
them a bedtime story I told them about
this very brave knight named Joel and
his adventure fighting a terrible dragon
called cancer every night I told them
more of the story but I never let the
story end
I was just building up a context that
they could understand and hoping that
our prayers would be answered and I
would never have to tell them that that
night who had fought so bravely was done
fighting and could rest now forever
fortunately I never did have to finish
that bedtime story my children outgrew
it
Joel responded better than anyone
expected to palliative treatment and so
instead of months we spent years
learning how to love our dying child
with all of our hearts learning to
recognize that shameful feeling of
holding back just a little love to try
to spare ourselves just a little pain
somewhere further down the road we
pushed past that self-preservation
because Joel was worth loving even if
that love could cross and that lesson of
intense vulnerability has changed me
more than any award ever could we
started living like Joel could live and
we began developing a video game called
that dragon cancer it was the story of
Joel it was the story of Hope in the
shadow of death it was the story of
faith and doubt and the realization that
a wrestle with doubts is a part of faith
may be the biggest part of it it was a
story that began as a miracle and ended
as a memorial
around
[Music]
when you play that dragon cancer you're
transformed into a witness of Joel's
life exploring an emotional landscape
clicking to discover more of what we as
a family felt and experienced it feels a
little bit like analyzing an interactive
poetry because every game mechanic is a
metaphor and so the more the player asks
themselves what we as designers were
trying to express and why the richer the
experience becomes we took that
vulnerability that Joel taught us and we
encoded the game with it players expect
their video games to offer them
branching narrative so that every
decision that they make feels important
and can change the outcome of the game
we subvert it that principle of game
design collapsing the choices in on the
player so that they discover for
themselves that there is nothing that
they can do that will change the outcome
for Joel and they feel that discovery as
deeply and desperately as we felt it on
ice when we held Joel in our arms
praying for our stubbornly holding out
hope for a grace that we could not
create for ourselves we'd all prefer to
win but when you discover that you can't
swim what do you value instead I never
planned to write video games but these
moments that really change our lives
they often come as a result of our
hardship and not our glory when we
thought that Joel could live I left the
game designing to my husband
chimed in here and there was a scene or
two and some suggestions but after the
night that Joel died the passion the
possibility of sharing Joel's life
through our video game it was something
that I couldn't resist I started writing
more i sat in on our teams design
meetings I added more ideas and I helped
direct scenes and I discovered that
creating a video
is telling a story but with an entirely
new vocabulary all the same elements of
imagination and symbolism are there but
they're just partnered with player
agency and system responsiveness it's
challenging work I have to think in a
totally new way to do it but I love it
and I wouldn't have known that without
Joel maybe you're a little surprised by
our choice to share our story as
terminal cancer through a video game
perhaps you're even thinking like so
many people before you cancer is not a
game well tell that to any pediatric
cancer parents that's ever taken an exam
glove and blown it up into a balloon or
transformed a syringe into a rocket ship
or let their child ride their IV pole
through the hospital halls like it was a
racecar cuz when you have children
everything is a game and when your young
child experiences something traumatic
you work even harder to make sure that
their life feels like a game because
children naturally explore their worlds
through play while cancer can steal many
things from a family it shouldn't steal
play if you're listening to me and
you're trying to imagine this family
that revolves entirely around a dying
child and you can't imagine joy as part
of that picture then we were right to
share our story with you because that
season of our life was hard unspeakably
hard at times but it was also pure hope
deep love and joy like I have never
experienced since our video game with
our attempts to share that world with
people who hadn't experienced it before
because we never could imagine that
world until it became ours we made a
video game that's hard to play it will
never be a blockbuster people have to
prepare themselves to invest emotionally
in a story that they know will
right to their hearts but when our
hearts break they heal a little
differently my broken heart has been
healing with a new and a deeper
compassion a desire to sit with people
in their pain to hear their stories and
try to help tell them so that they know
that they're seen on the night when that
dragon cancer won the game for impact
award we cheered we smiled and we talked
about Joel and the impact he had on our
life on all of those hard and hopeful
nights that we shared with him when he
changed our hearts and taught us so much
more about life and love and faith and
purpose that award will never mean as
much to me even a single photograph as
much fun but it does represent all of
the people who his life has impacted
people I'll never meet they write me
emails sometimes they tell me that they
miss Joel even though they never met him
they describe the tears that I have shed
for my son and it makes my burden of
grief just a little bit lighter knowing
that it's shared with a 10 year old
watching a YouTube playthrough or a
doctor playing on his airplane with a
smartphone or a professor introducing
Joel to her first year philosophy
students we made a video game that's
hard to play but that feels just right
to me because the hardest moments of our
lives change us more than any goal we
could ever accomplish tragedy has
shifted my heart more than any dream I
could ever see come true thank you
[Applause]
you